---
title: PhD journal entry
date: 2025-09-24
---

Finally. It is finally done. I submitted my paper to ICLR 2026. It's been stressful weeks but I am
now in vacations for the next two weeks. I will finally rest a little bit.

Everything is easier when you're suddenly SotA on TSP-10k. It also helps a lot to accept that
ChatGPT can rewrite my paragraphs better than me. I am still surprised and amazed by the time and
effort it takes to write a (not even good) paper.

On the positive side, I am really happy with the end result of my paper. I'd like to be this proud
on every paper I end up working on, at least when I'm first author. I am already thinking a lot
about the next research project, and also my reading list has never been this big. A lot of good
perspectives ahead!

As a close friend said to me while playing Draven:
> Don't let dreams be dreams!

Let's hope for the best for my paper!

---

I also started this semester's teaching. It added a lot to my already existing stress. Last year I
didn't had the time to prepare both practical exercises and the slides, so I ended up "stealing"
slides here and there, from my previous teachers mainly. This year, I'd like to fully produce my own
slides, which I did for the first two classes at least. I really like the fact that I own my course
fully.

As expected, making the slides takes a lot of time. I am making them as I imagine what the course
should teach about. I already changed a lot of things compared to last year. I believe I should
teach less than last year to make sure my students fully focus their learning on the core material.
Surprisingly, I have been able to teach a 3-hour class with only 30 slides and a practical exercise!
Even my girlfriend is not convinced (she may be right on this one).

The good news is that now that my paper is submitted I won't have to focus on two things at the same
time. The bad news is that I won't properly rest until all slides are done. So even for the next two
weeks of vacations, I will still need to work on my course. At least, I am learning a lot of typst
and matplotlib.

My students seem more involved than last year overall. I am not sure but I think it may be due to
the fact that this year I did not screw up the first class as I did last year. It might be important
to make a good first impression to capture the students focus for the rest of the semester.
