---
title: PhD journal entry
date: 2025-11-16
---

Well well, a lot have happened since my last entry.

First, I explored directly predicting permutations and while it does not work very much it led me
towards a nice formulation of **permutation diffusion**. This framework seems very natural, and if it
works well it would be very neat, with consequences outside of the TSP! This is still just an idea
for now, I have to clearly see how to adapt the original diffusion method to my framework. And I
don't know yet if I should go diffusion or flow matching. I followed the
[class](https://diffusion.csail.mit.edu/) from Peter Holderrieth and Ezra Erives and that was
particularly interesting! It is now much clearer what the difference is between the two approaches.

But for now, I am focused on my **ICLR reviews**. Because yes, they just came out this week! And sadly
my ratings are not very good, they are all 4s, all five of them. I knew I would have to fight for my
paper but I would have hoped for at least one 6 (it's out of 10, by steps of 2). As expected, the
fact that we only try on TSP is the most common critic. But to my surprise, a lot of them also did
not find the idea of using PEs directly as geometric embedding novel or interesting.

I have to convince the reviewers otherwise, as I am not giving up that fast! Since last Wednesday, I
have lost many nights towards implementing the CVRP variant. Hopefully, tonight I have a trained
model on the CVRP that will work well and convince my reviewers that our method can be applied to
many routing problems.

---

All this work and yet next week and the week after are going to be crazy! Next week we should get
the keys of our new and very first apartment!! We have a lot of work to do before moving in. It will
be great but stressful at the same time. *Nights must be sacrificed.*

---

On another note, we came to see our friend and colleague from the lab yesterday. He had an important
heart surgery and we visited him by surprise to show him support. This was great and I think it got
all the lab friends a little bit more closer together.

---

Finally, I can see that I am releasing the pressure from my teaching hours. The fact that I'm using
the previous slides helps, but I am also less stressed in general I believe. This makes the
experience much better. But I still think that it takes too much time.
