---
title: PhD journal entry
date: 2025-10-12
---

Today is my last holiday day. Since last time, I've slept a lot, got sick, and prepared my class a
lot. _A LOT._ I actually got sick and almost burnt out because of this, during my own vacations. This
and a lot of other things I had to do for our future apartment.

My students seems much more interested than last year about Machine Learning. That's gratifying.
Maybe my class is better organized and more visually appealing. I've put a lot of work into animated
GIFs that explain how GD and PCA work. I'm becoming the master of matplotlib. But that took too much
of my stress and time. I'm going back to my previous slides as soon as we finish the ML class. Maybe
next year I'll finish the rest!

---

Tomorrow I'm starting again my PhD. I'm actually eager to read the _bunch_ of papers I've kept on my
todo list. And my next ideas to try could be fun! I'd like to try to predict the TSP solution in one
shot, by using my model only once. The only papers that does this are papers that use heavy decoding
schemes. I'd like to try to use a very trivial one, that does not search at all.

ICLR 2026 submitted papers just came out. It's fun to see my own paper in that list. And also a bit
scary! Some papers have better results than mine. But I still like my direction. I think it is
important to simplify the method.

---

I still profited from those holidays to see a lot of friends. I've heard that happiness mainly comes
from the strength of your relationship. My happiness sure comes from those relationships, and from
funny research ideas that comes to life, of course.
