---
title: PhD journal entry
date: "2025-06-13"
---

Last week was my first CSI. And it was two days before the meeting that I discovered that I
overlooked one of the papers from my SotA review. This new paper have the same results as me, with
only half of what I'm doing.

So for this week's meeting with my supervisor, I was the only one having an optimist look at my
project. I thought a lot before the meeting, and this new paper forced me to look at what I could do
differently. This led me to one of those nights, where I can't sleep because my brain is thinking
too much. I couldn't think about something else. I wanted to get up and implement my ideas right
away. But I know I would regret the next day when I'll be sleeping the whole day and actually
acomplished nothing, because at 4am you can't code decently even if you're convinced you can.

So for the full list of what I thought about:

- I should find a mathematically justified expression for my scaling factor
- Actually when I rescale the distances, it makes the destination and starting cities probably hard
  to find to all the cities that are too far away
- I should implement everything in **JAX**, using the `jax.nn.scaled_dot_attention` and the bias
  argument
- How to turn the one-step training into a complete prediction of the whole solution? Something like
  what's happening for LLM training

I tried the last idea, which is more stable than the usual training, but leads to lower performance
overall (each city is now trying to predict its next city to visit, instead of being focus all at
one to predict the next step).

I also followed the advice from Fred and tested if ALiBi was useful at all or not. From my little
experiment, it was not useful :(. But! It make me think: *why?* I believe it is due to the missing
relative orientation of the cities, as they only know how far each of them are from each other, but
not where they are exactly. This led me to try RoPE, and it looks very promising!!
