---
title: PhD journal entry
date: 2026-02-07
---

I am writing this on my way back from Paris, where we attended to a wedding of a friend from a lab.
The more I come to Paris the more shiner it feels. I used to completely dislike this city. We took
the night train back, it is a first for me. I was originally skeptical but it might actually be
quite fun and time saving.

Since I recently finished grading my students, I had the time to reflect a little bit about my
approach this year considering that my students use AI to do their practical exams.

My main approach was to do every exams orally. It is more of a discussion than a question/answer
type of oral. The idea was that it would be easier to get to know how good they understood the class
by having a discussion with them directly. At the same time, they would show me what they did for
the practical exam, and I would judge if they truly understood the code they produced or if they
just copied and paste.

The first exam went pretty bad. I only gave 15 min per students to explain their code and discuss a
little bit, but I quickly understood after the first student that I needed to put some pressure
during their presentation if I wanted to have time for a discussion. Some of the students were
feeling pretty bad about it because they worked hard and wanted to show me everything, which I can
totally understand! So for the second exam, I gave them 30 minutes each, which required me to take
two full days to see everyone.

In the end, the main issue is that it becomes very hard to give a faithful grade. Perhaps comically,
vibe code requires vibe examination be properly judged. Maybe the other solution is to give them a
pen and paper and ask them to implement something by hand? In general I feel like it is an
improvement over last year but I would probably do a mix between a written and an oral exam next
time.
