---
title: PhD journal entry
date: 2026-05-27
---

So, I've tackled the main critic to my PENS paper. Sadly, I submitted again before the latest
results but I have the satisfaction that I now have a way not to rely on the rescaling heuristic.
The only issue I have is that my model is now much slower.

Other than that, I've been trying to understand why `vTSP` would not generalize to large instances.
The difference between PENS and all my other attempts is striking. I think I narrowed it down to the
fact that PENS does two thing very well:

1. Natively trains on diverse instance sizes.
2. Every step is independent to the previous steps for the model. It never sees what it has previously done.

The first property ensure that PENS's attention mechanism scale well to variable sequence length.
The second one avoid a teacher-forcing deviation during inference.

I also thought about a third important property: computation allocation. PENS allocate its whole
compute budget at every step toward a single next-step prediction. I believe it to not be that
important but I might be wrong.

With those property laid out, we can try to improve my previous attempt, by training on diverse set
of instances and using RL so that our model learns on-policy (no more training/inference mismatch).

We'll see!

---

I changed a little bit how I conduct my research. I've been exploring much more instead of focusing
on a single idea. I noticed that I was too often too focus on a single idea and try to make it a
reality where sometimes it just won't. But now I try to explore as much as possible, gather some
feedback, and maybe move on. Hopefully I can explain why my idea did not work and this would lead me
to another idea to try.

This has been how I moved from `vTSP` to `inserTSP`, to `vTSP` back with RL, all while solving my
rescaling heuristic issue.

---

I've wrote recommendation letters for two students. I realize that being a teacher is probably the
best I can bring to society. There's not many things more useful than teachers actually. It's
infuriating that here in France teachers are not considered at all.
