---
title: PhD journal entry
date: 2026-04-27
---

This week I've been working on the implementation of my encoder-decoder TSP solver, which I called
`vTSP` because it aims to be a much faster TSP solver than the usual neural decoder-only solvers. My
hope is that even if autoregressive decoder-only solvers are more "pure", in the sense that they
iteratively solve smaller independent path-TSP subproblems, they are inherently non-parallelizable.
By using an encoder-decoder architecture, I can train on the whole solution in parallel, and more
importantly, I also unlock many inference optimization techniques. Among the optimization tricks I'd
like to use, speculation decoding would be the most promising in my opinion. When generating a TSP
solution, most of the steps are actually pretty obvious for the model, and I am pretty sure a
smaller model would be as good as the larger model. For now I have been able to test my
encoder-decoder architecture and I can validate that training is much faster on TSP-100 compared to
decoder-only models. But the model is not generalizing to larger instances, which is normal because
it is trained on a single instance size (decoder-only models are actually all path-TSP instances
between 3 and 100 during training!). I will train my model on variable TSP instance sizes (from 32
to 128) to hopefully improve its size-generalization.

I've added a `/recettes` section on my website! It's always painful to find the good recipe and also
to remember plates that you've made in the past. This part of my website is a simple, personal and
add/cookie-free way to look at our favorite recipes. I have also put the circular TSP post online,
but I am not entirely satisfied with this version. I would like to have better table management, to
be able to have column titles that span multiple columns. Rhaaa!

I've been doing a lot of bike and rollerskating this week. I would really like to be biking as a
daily routine. This would mean _more than 40km_ per day when I go to work!
