---
title: PhD journal entry
date: 2026-04-19
---

Hello journal! It's been a long time since you haven't been live online, this might explain why I've
left you down a little bit lately...

Multiple things have happened since my last entry. First, our apartment renovation is almost done.
This website is now running in my brand new storage room. It's beautiful. It's amazing to be able to
do anything in your home, and to organize it the way you want. Back in december, we expected the
renovations to be finished by the end of january, and now I think it will be done by the end of this
month, _april_.

I've given up my circular flow matching idea. I did my best to make it work and I have to let it go.
I am still unsure why it do not work as well as the autoregressive approaches. It might be possible
that it has something to do with the fact that the solution space is discrete instead of continuous.
An autoregressive model predicts probabilities for the next visits, and if it is wrong it will
correct the predicted distribution to align with its best guesses. On the other hand, a continuous
model has to predict a single scalar for each city. If it is unsure about a particular city, it
cannot express multiple solutions candidates at the same time. The best it could do would be to put
a city in the center of its potential positions, which is very bad in my case. I still believe the
circular representation is a good one, maybe a better approach would be to generate the solution in
some latent space and use a VAE to embed the TSP within this space. It should be easier to express
multiple possibilities in some abstract higher dimension. I prepared a blogpost to write about it,
at least this idea will be written somewhere.

I received the reviews from IJCAI. R1 was very positive and gave us a strong accept (!!), R2 was not
convinced by the novelty and gave us a weak reject and R3 was an LLM review and gave us a borderline
accept. If we ignore R3 (which I guess just asked to remains neutral positive), the reviews were
very similar to our ICLR reviews. The main difference is that they now don't ask for additional
results on other problems (we added CVRP since ICLR). Now there still remains the question of our
rescaling trick, they all ask for a more grounded approach. I agree of course, but I believe they
miss the point of our heuristic. To me, it shows that with a simple trick we can beat complex
(arguably much more complex than us) neural TSP solvers. Furthermore, it shows how important the
embedding aliasing issue is. We should have the final answers in two weeks maximum!

With all those comments about my heuristic it convinced me that it would a good thing to find a
better and principled approach. I tried a few things already but nothing seems to be working for
now.
